docs/task-fsm.md, before:

# Task State Machine

> Source code: `src/pegasus/task/`

## Core Idea

Each task is an independent finite state machine (FSM). The FSM itself **performs no I/O operations** — it is responsible for only three things:
1. Validate the legality of state transitions
2. Update state
3. Record transition history

Actual LLM calls, tool calls, and other I/O operations are initiated by the Agent after a state transition.

## TaskState

6 states, 2 terminal:

```
                    ┌─────────┐
                    │  IDLE   │ ← just created
                    └────┬────┘
                         │ TASK_CREATED
                    ┌────▼─────┐
              ┌────▶│REASONING │ ← reason (understand + think + plan)
              │     └────┬─────┘
              │          │ REASON_DONE          NEED_MORE_INFO
              │     ┌────▼────┐                     │
              │     │ ACTING  │←── multi-step loop ┌▼─────────┐
              │     └────┬────┘                    │SUSPENDED │
              │          │                         └──┬───────┘
              │     ┌────▼────┐                       │
              │     │ Done?   │    MESSAGE_RECEIVED    │
              │     └────┬────┘    / TASK_RESUMED ─────┘
              │  tool_call│  respond
              │   steps   │  steps
              └───────────┘   │
                         ┌────▼─────┐
                         │COMPLETED │ ← terminal state
                         └──────────┘
                         ┌──────────┐
                         │ FAILED   │ ← terminal state (reachable from any)
                         └──────────┘
```

```typescript
const TaskState = {
    IDLE:        "idle",
    REASONING:   "reasoning",
    ACTING:      "acting",
    SUSPENDED:   "suspended",
    COMPLETED:   "completed",    // terminal
    FAILED:      "failed",       // terminal
} as const;
```

**Terminal states**: after reaching `COMPLETED` or `FAILED`, no further transitions are accepted; throws `InvalidStateTransition`.

**Suspendable states**: only active states (REASONING / ACTING) can be suspended.

## Transition Table

Static transitions (target state is fixed):

| Current State | Event | → Target State |
|---------------|-------|----------------|
| IDLE | TASK_CREATED | REASONING |
| REASONING | REASON_DONE | ACTING |
| REASONING | NEED_MORE_INFO | SUSPENDED |
| SUSPENDED | MESSAGE_RECEIVED | REASONING |

Dynamic transitions (target state determined at runtime):

| Current State | Event | → Dynamic Decision |
|---------------|-------|--------------------|
| ACTING | TOOL_CALL_COMPLETED | plan has more steps → ACTING; otherwise → see below |
| ACTING | TOOL_CALL_FAILED | plan has more steps → ACTING; otherwise → see below |
| ACTING | STEP_COMPLETED | plan has more steps → ACTING; otherwise → see below |
| SUSPENDED | TASK_RESUMED | restore to pre-suspend state |

**Completion routing** (when all plan steps are done):
- Plan contains any `tool_call` steps → **REASONING** (continue cognitive loop)
- Plan contains only `respond` steps → **COMPLETED** (task is done)

This replaces the old Reflect stage verdict. The FSM now makes the completion decision based on plan step types, eliminating the need for a separate reflection stage in the cognitive loop.

Special transitions (triggerable from any active state):

| Event | → Target State | Condition |
|-------|----------------|-----------|
| TASK_SUSPENDED | SUSPENDED | current state is active (suspendable) |
| TASK_FAILED | FAILED | any non-terminal state |

## TaskFSM

```
TaskFSM
├── taskId: string                     # short ID
├── state: TaskState                   # current state
├── context: TaskContext               # accumulated intermediate artifacts
├── history: StateTransition[]         # state transition history
├── createdAt / updatedAt: number
├── priority: number                   # priority (lower = higher)
└── metadata: Record<string, unknown>
```

**Key methods**:
- `transition(event) → TaskState`: execute transition, return new state; throws on invalid
- `canTransition(eventType) → boolean`: check if transition is valid (without executing)
- `fromEvent(event) → TaskFSM`: create task from external input event
- `isTerminal` / `isActive`: state queries

**Transition history**: each transition records a `StateTransition` (fromState, toState, triggerEventType, triggerEventId, timestamp), enabling precise reconstruction of every step.

## TaskContext

Task context — all information accumulated from task creation to completion:

```
TaskContext
├── Original input
│   ├── inputText: string
│   ├── inputMetadata: Record<string, unknown>
│   └── source: string
│
├── Cognitive stage outputs
│   ├── reasoning: Record<string, unknown> | null   # Reason (Thinker) output
│   ├── plan: Plan | null                           # Reason (Planner) output
│   ├── actionsDone: ActionResult[]
│   ├── reflections: Reflection[]                   # legacy, kept for compat
│   └── postReflection?: PostTaskReflection | null  # async post-task reflection
│
├── Loop control
│   └── iteration: number                           # Reason → Act loop iteration
│
├── Result
│   ├── finalResult: unknown
│   └── error: string | null
│
├── Suspend / Resume
│   ├── suspendedState: string | null               # state before suspension
│   └── suspendReason: string | null
│
└── Conversation history
    └── messages: Message[]                         # Working Memory fragment
```

**Plan data structure**:
```
Plan
├── goal: string                          # task goal
├── steps: PlanStep[]                     # execution steps
│   └── PlanStep
│       ├── index: number
│       ├── description: string
│       ├── actionType: string            # "tool_call" / "respond" / "generate"
│       ├── actionParams: Record<string, unknown>
│       └── completed: boolean
└── reasoning: string                     # planning rationale
```

Plan provides `currentStep` (next uncompleted step) and `hasMoreSteps` properties, which Actor uses to drive step execution.

**PostTaskReflection data structure**:
```
PostTaskReflection
├── facts: Array<{ path: string; content: string }>   # memory facts to write
├── episode: {                                         # episodic memory entry
│     title: string
│     summary: string
│     details: string
│     lesson: string
│   } | null
└── assessment: string                                 # brief assessment
```

PostTaskReflection is produced by the async PostTaskReflector after task completion. It writes extracted facts and episode summaries to long-term memory. Unlike the old Reflection verdict, it does not influence the cognitive loop — it is purely for learning.

## TaskRegistry

Active task registry. Maintains all uncompleted tasks.

```typescript
class TaskRegistry {
    register(task)                       // register new task
    get(taskId) → TaskFSM               // get task (throws if not found)
    getOrNull(taskId)                   // get task (returns null if not found)
    remove(taskId)                       // remove task
    listActive() → TaskFSM[]           // list active tasks
    listAll() → TaskFSM[]              // list all tasks
    cleanupTerminal()                    // clean up terminal tasks
    activeCount → number                // active task count
}
```

When the active task count reaches the `maxActive` limit, registration is not blocked but a warning is logged. The scheduling layer can decide whether to queue based on this.

## Persistence Strategy

Not every step is written to disk — only at critical checkpoints:

| Timing | Persisted Content | Reason |
|--------|-------------------|--------|
| TASK_CREATED | Input, source, metadata | Task identity and origin |
| REASON_DONE | Full Plan + reasoning + new messages | Planning is expensive, cannot lose |
| TOOL_CALL_COMPLETED | New messages (tool results) | Tool actions may be irreversible |
| TOOL_CALL_FAILED | New messages | Record failures for debugging |
| NEED_MORE_INFO | Reasoning | Track why task was suspended |
| TASK_SUSPENDED | Full TaskContext snapshot | Recovery needs full context |
| TASK_COMPLETED | Full TaskContext | Archive to Episodic Memory |
| REFLECTION_COMPLETE | Facts written, episode flag, assessment | Observability (async, post-task) |
| TASK_FAILED | TaskContext + error | Post-mortem analysis |

Commit message:

feat: memory & reflection redesign — cache-friendly index + tool-use reflector (#39)
Changes:
- Move memory index from system prompt to first user message (cache-friendly, iteration=1 only)
- Rewrite PostTaskReflector from structured JSON to tool-use loop with memory tools
- Add memory_patch tool for partial file updates
- Add optional summary parameter to memory_append
- Simplify PostTaskReflection to {assessment, toolCallsCount}
- Update REFLECTION_COMPLETE payload
- Update memory-system, cognitive, agent, FSM docs

docs/task-fsm.md, after:

# Task State Machine

> Source code: `src/pegasus/task/`

## Core Idea

Each task is an independent finite state machine (FSM). The FSM itself **performs no I/O operations** — it is responsible for only three things:
1. Validate the legality of state transitions
2. Update state
3. Record transition history

Actual LLM calls, tool calls, and other I/O operations are initiated by the Agent after a state transition.

## TaskState

6 states, 2 terminal:

```
                    ┌─────────┐
                    │  IDLE   │ ← just created
                    └────┬────┘
                         │ TASK_CREATED
                    ┌────▼─────┐
              ┌────▶│REASONING │ ← reason (understand + think + plan)
              │     └────┬─────┘
              │          │ REASON_DONE          NEED_MORE_INFO
              │     ┌────▼────┐                     │
              │     │ ACTING  │←── multi-step loop ┌▼─────────┐
              │     └────┬────┘                    │SUSPENDED │
              │          │                         └──┬───────┘
              │     ┌────▼────┐                       │
              │     │ Done?   │    MESSAGE_RECEIVED    │
              │     └────┬────┘    / TASK_RESUMED ─────┘
              │  tool_call│  respond
              │   steps   │  steps
              └───────────┘   │
                         ┌────▼─────┐
                         │COMPLETED │ ← terminal state
                         └──────────┘
                         ┌──────────┐
                         │ FAILED   │ ← terminal state (reachable from any)
                         └──────────┘
```

```typescript
const TaskState = {
    IDLE:        "idle",
    REASONING:   "reasoning",
    ACTING:      "acting",
    SUSPENDED:   "suspended",
    COMPLETED:   "completed",    // terminal
    FAILED:      "failed",       // terminal
} as const;
```

**Terminal states**: after reaching `COMPLETED` or `FAILED`, no further transitions are accepted; throws `InvalidStateTransition`.

**Suspendable states**: only active states (REASONING / ACTING) can be suspended.

## Transition Table

Static transitions (target state is fixed):

| Current State | Event | → Target State |
|---------------|-------|----------------|
| IDLE | TASK_CREATED | REASONING |
| REASONING | REASON_DONE | ACTING |
| REASONING | NEED_MORE_INFO | SUSPENDED |
| SUSPENDED | MESSAGE_RECEIVED | REASONING |

Dynamic transitions (target state determined at runtime):

| Current State | Event | → Dynamic Decision |
|---------------|-------|--------------------|
| ACTING | TOOL_CALL_COMPLETED | plan has more steps → ACTING; otherwise → see below |
| ACTING | TOOL_CALL_FAILED | plan has more steps → ACTING; otherwise → see below |
| ACTING | STEP_COMPLETED | plan has more steps → ACTING; otherwise → see below |
| SUSPENDED | TASK_RESUMED | restore to pre-suspend state |

**Completion routing** (when all plan steps are done):
- Plan contains any `tool_call` steps → **REASONING** (continue cognitive loop)
- Plan contains only `respond` steps → **COMPLETED** (task is done)

This replaces the old Reflect stage verdict. The FSM now makes the completion decision based on plan step types, eliminating the need for a separate reflection stage in the cognitive loop.

Special transitions (triggerable from any active state):

| Event | → Target State | Condition |
|-------|----------------|-----------|
| TASK_SUSPENDED | SUSPENDED | current state is active (suspendable) |
| TASK_FAILED | FAILED | any non-terminal state |

## TaskFSM

```
TaskFSM
├── taskId: string                     # short ID
├── state: TaskState                   # current state
├── context: TaskContext               # accumulated intermediate artifacts
├── history: StateTransition[]         # state transition history
├── createdAt / updatedAt: number
├── priority: number                   # priority (lower = higher)
└── metadata: Record<string, unknown>
```

**Key methods**:
- `transition(event) → TaskState`: execute transition, return new state; throws on invalid
- `canTransition(eventType) → boolean`: check if transition is valid (without executing)
- `fromEvent(event) → TaskFSM`: create task from external input event
- `isTerminal` / `isActive`: state queries

**Transition history**: each transition records a `StateTransition` (fromState, toState, triggerEventType, triggerEventId, timestamp), enabling precise reconstruction of every step.

## TaskContext

Task context — all information accumulated from task creation to completion:

```
TaskContext
├── Original input
│   ├── inputText: string
│   ├── inputMetadata: Record<string, unknown>
│   └── source: string
│
├── Cognitive stage outputs
│   ├── reasoning: Record<string, unknown> | null   # Reason (Thinker) output
│   ├── plan: Plan | null                           # Reason (Planner) output
│   ├── actionsDone: ActionResult[]
│   ├── reflections: Reflection[]                   # legacy, kept for compat
│   └── postReflection?: PostTaskReflection | null  # async post-task reflection
│
├── Loop control
│   └── iteration: number                           # Reason → Act loop iteration
│
├── Result
│   ├── finalResult: unknown
│   └── error: string | null
│
├── Suspend / Resume
│   ├── suspendedState: string | null               # state before suspension
│   └── suspendReason: string | null
│
└── Conversation history
    └── messages: Message[]                         # Working Memory fragment
```

**Plan data structure**:
```
Plan
├── goal: string                          # task goal
├── steps: PlanStep[]                     # execution steps
│   └── PlanStep
│       ├── index: number
│       ├── description: string
│       ├── actionType: string            # "tool_call" / "respond" / "generate"
│       ├── actionParams: Record<string, unknown>
│       └── completed: boolean
└── reasoning: string                     # planning rationale
```

Plan provides `currentStep` (next uncompleted step) and `hasMoreSteps` properties, which Actor uses to drive step execution.

**PostTaskReflection data structure**:
```
PostTaskReflection
├── assessment: string                                 # brief assessment of what was learned
└── toolCallsCount: number                             # number of memory tool calls made
```

PostTaskReflection is produced by the async PostTaskReflector after task completion. The Reflector uses a tool-use loop where the LLM directly calls memory tools (read/write/patch/append) — the actual memory writes happen inside the loop, so the reflection result only records the assessment and how many tool calls were made. Unlike the old Reflection verdict, it does not influence the cognitive loop — it is purely for learning.

## TaskRegistry

Active task registry. Maintains all uncompleted tasks.

```typescript
class TaskRegistry {
    register(task)                       // register new task
    get(taskId) → TaskFSM               // get task (throws if not found)
    getOrNull(taskId)                   // get task (returns null if not found)
    remove(taskId)                       // remove task
    listActive() → TaskFSM[]           // list active tasks
    listAll() → TaskFSM[]              // list all tasks
    cleanupTerminal()                    // clean up terminal tasks
    activeCount → number                // active task count
}
```

When the active task count reaches the `maxActive` limit, registration is not blocked but a warning is logged. The scheduling layer can decide whether to queue based on this.

## Persistence Strategy

Not every step is written to disk — only at critical checkpoints:

| Timing | Persisted Content | Reason |
|--------|-------------------|--------|
| TASK_CREATED | Input, source, metadata | Task identity and origin |
| REASON_DONE | Full Plan + reasoning + new messages | Planning is expensive, cannot lose |
| TOOL_CALL_COMPLETED | New messages (tool results) | Tool actions may be irreversible |
| TOOL_CALL_FAILED | New messages | Record failures for debugging |
| NEED_MORE_INFO | Reasoning | Track why task was suspended |
| TASK_SUSPENDED | Full TaskContext snapshot | Recovery needs full context |
| TASK_COMPLETED | Full TaskContext | Archive to Episodic Memory |
| REFLECTION_COMPLETE | Facts written, episode flag, assessment | Observability (async, post-task) |
| TASK_FAILED | TaskContext + error | Post-mortem analysis |
